Syndicate five java dev must haves (#3969)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2024-08-25-five-java-dev-musthaves-fast-startup.adoc

categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/vijaysun-omr
author_github: https://github.com/vijaysun-omr
seo-title: Five Java Developer Must-Haves for Ultra-Fast Startup Solutions - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Faster Java startup should not compromise developer experience, throughput performance, or security. We discuss how we achieved this with Liberty InstantOn.
blog_description: "Faster Java startup should not compromise developer experience, throughput performance, or security. We discuss how we achieved this with Liberty InstantOn."
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
additional_authors:
- name: Thomas Watson
  github: https://github.com/tjwatson
  image: https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/tjwatson
- name: Laura Cowen
  github: https://github.com/lauracowen
  image: https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/lauracowen
---
= Five Java Developer Must-Haves for Ultra-Fast Startup Solutions
Vijay Sundaresan <https://github.com/vijaysun-omr>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> As more and more of our applications are being designed and developed to be deployed into the cloud, and we start to move towards microservices and even serverless style application architecture, start-up times are becoming ever more important. Unfortunately, although Java is a fantastic, robust language for us to use for developing enterprise applications, it isn't really known for its quick start-up times. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As more and more of our applications are developed for the cloud, and we move towards microservices and even serverless application architecture, start-up times are becoming ever more important. Unfortunately, although Java is a fantastic, robust language for developing enterprise applications, it isn't really known for its quick start-up times. 
```

> However, several solutions have recently emerged to help with this, speeding up Java startup. They range from compiling a link:https://www.graalvm.org/latest/reference-manual/native-image/[native image] that removes the JVM from the compiled app (the startup speed bottleneck in Java apps) to link:https://docs.azul.com/core/crac/crac-introduction[taking a snapshot of the application] after startup so that there are no startup tasks to complete when restored. But, most of these solutions suffer from compromises to developer experience, throughput performance, or security. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, several solutions have recently emerged to help speed up Java startup. They range from compiling a link:https://www.graalvm.org/latest/reference-manual/native-image/[native image] that removes the JVM from the compiled app (the startup speed bottleneck in Java apps) to link:https://docs.azul.com/core/crac/crac-introduction[taking a snapshot of the application] after startup so that there are no startup tasks to complete when it's restored. But, most of these solutions suffer from compromises to developer experience, throughput performance, or security. 
```

What we really need is a solution that vastly improves the start-up time of Java applications, whilst also ensuring:

> * It's easy for developers to implement in apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It's easy to implement in apps.
```

> * It's easy for developers to use existing skills and APIs to write apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It's easy to use existing skills and APIs to write apps.
```

> * It's easy for developers to enable on-the-fly configuration at deployment (restore) time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It's easy to enable on-the-fly configuration at deployment (restore) time. 
```

* The app's peak throughput performance is not degraded.
* The security of the app is not compromised.

In an article on link:https://dzone.com/articles/five-java-developer-must-haves-for-ultra-fast-star[DZone], IBM's InstantOn lead and Hybrid Cloud Performance Architect explore each of these considerations and how they've been able to achieve fast start-up without compromising on any of them with Liberty InstantOn!

== Find out more:

> Find out more about Liberty InstantOn and how it enables all of this without compromise in the the full article here: https://dzone.com/articles/five-java-developer-must-haves-for-ultra-fast-star

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find out more about Liberty InstantOn and how it enables all of this without compromise in link:https://dzone.com/articles/five-java-developer-must-haves-for-ultra-fast-star[Five Java Developer Must-Haves for Ultra-Fast Startup Solutions].
```
